McKinsey exists to solve business problems. The consultants
who succeed at McKinsey love to solve problems.
As one former EM* put it:
Problem solving isn’t a thing you do at McKinsey;
it’s what you do at McKinsey. It’s almost
as though you approached everything looking
for ways it could be better, whatever it was. A
part of you is always asking, “Why is something
done this way? Is this the best way it can
be done?” You have to be fundamentally skeptical
about everything.
Part One describes how McKinsey thinks about
business problems. It shows what it means to be factbased,
structured, and hypothesis-driven. It will tell you
the McKinsey way to approach a business problem, and
offer you a few choice rules to live by when trying to
solve them.
*Engagement manager. The EM is in charge of the day-to-day work of a McKinsey
team.




1
BUILDING THE SOLUTION
Like all things McKinsey, the Firm’s problem-solving process
has three major attributes. When team members meet for the
first time to discuss their client’s problem, they know that
their solution will be
• Fact-based
• Rigidly structured
• Hypothesis-driven*
In this chapter, you will learn exactly what these attributes
mean and how you can apply them in your business.
3
*At McKinsey, three is a magic number. Things at the Firm come in threes. Notice that this
list has three items. Ask a McKinsey-ite a complex question, and you are likely to hear
“There are three reasons. . .” Then, of course (as you will learn later in the book) there is the
true McKinsey hierarchy for consultants—in descending order: client, Firm, you.
Copyright 1999 Ethan M. Rasiel. Click here for Terms of Use.
FACTS ARE FRIENDLY
Facts are the bricks with which you will lay a path to your
solution and build pillars to support it. Don’t fear the facts.
Problem solving at the Firm begins with facts. On the first day of
an engagement, all members of the team comb through stacks of
articles and internal research documents to gather enough facts to
illuminate their piece of the problem for the first team meeting.
Having drawn up an initial hypothesis for the problem, the team
then races to gather the facts necessary (when put through the
appropriate analyses) to support or refute it.
At the start of your time at McKinsey, gathering and analyzing
facts is your raison d’étre. As one former SEM* observed:
When you strip away a lot of the high-minded language with
which McKinsey dresses up its problem-solving process, it
comes down to very careful, high-quality analysis of the
components of the problem combined with an aggressive
attitude toward fact gathering.
Why are facts so important to the way McKinsey does business?
There are two reasons. First, facts compensate for lack of
gut instinct (see “ . . . But Every Client Is Unique” in Chapter 2).
Most McKinsey-ites are generalists. They know a little about a lot
of things. As they gain experience and move through the ranks,
they may come to know a lot about a lot of things. Even at this
point, however, they will still know less about, say, inventory
4 Thinking About Business Problems
*Senior engagement manager. In many ways a junior partner, the SEM is in charge of multiple
studies and is expected to take a hand in client relations. SEMs get all the stress of partnership
with less pay.
management practices for perishable foodstuffs than the folks
who have been running the distribution operations of Stop &
Shop for the last 10 years. Gut instinct might tell those folks the
solution to an inventory management problem in 10 seconds
(although they still would be wise to check the facts); McKinsey
will go to the facts first.
Second, facts bridge the credibility gap. When she joins the
Firm, the typical associate* (at least in the United States) will have
graduated near the top of her college class, spent two or three years
working for a large company, then received her MBA from a top
business school. She will be in her mid- to late twenties. On her
first engagement she may have to present her analysis to the CEO
of a Fortune 50 company, who will not give much credence to
what some newly minted, 27-year-old MBA has to say—unless she
has an overwhelming weight of facts to back her up. This is just
as true for a junior executive presenting a proposal to his boss.
Despite (or possibly because of) the power of facts, many businesspeople
fear them. Perhaps they are afraid that if they look too
closely at the facts, they—or someone above them—might not like
what they see. Maybe they think that if they don’t look, the nasty
facts will go away—but they won’t. Hiding from the facts is a prescription
for failure—eventually, truth will out. You must not fear
the facts. Hunt for them, use them, but don’t fear them.
Building the Solution 5
*Associate: An entry-level McKinsey consultant, usually with an MBA. Technically, every
consultant who has not made partner, even the hottest SEM, is still an associate of the Firm.
FEEL FREE TO BE MECE
To structure your thinking when solving business problems
(or anything, for that matter), you must be complete while
avoiding confusion and overlap.
MECE (pronounced “me-see”) stands for “mutually exclusive, collectively
exhaustive” and it is a sine qua non of the problem-solving
process at McKinsey. MECE gets pounded into every new associate’s
head from the moment of entering the Firm. Every document
(including internal memos), every presentation, every e-mail and
voice mail produced by a McKinsey-ite is supposed to be MECE.
Ask any number of McKinsey alumni what they remember most
about the way the Firm solves problems and they will tell you,
“MECE, MECE, MECE.”
MECE structures your thinking with maximum clarity (hence
minimum confusion) and maximum completeness. MECE starts at
the top level of your solution—the list of issues making up the problem
you have to solve. When you think you have determined the
issues, take a hard look at them. Is each one a separate and distinct
issue? If so, then your issue list is mutually exclusive. Does every
aspect of the problem come under one (and only one) of these
issues—that is, have you thought of everything? If so, then your issues
are collectively exhaustive. Suppose your team is working on a study
for that famous American manufacturing firm Acme Widgets. The
problem you face is “We need to sell more widgets.” Your team might
come up with a list of the following ways to increase widget sales:
• Changing the way we sell our widgets to retail outlets.
• Improving the way we market our widgets to consumers.
• Reducing the unit cost of our widgets.
6 Thinking About Business Problems
If this list looks rather generic, that’s fine; we will talk about
moving down a level of detail in the next section. What matters is
that the list is MECE.
Suppose you add another item, say, “Reengineering our widget
production process.” How does that fit with the three issues you
already have? This is certainly an important issue, but it isn’t a
fourth point alongside the others. It falls under “Reducing the unit
cost,” along with other subissues such as “Leveraging our distribution
system” and “Improving our inventory management.” Why?
Because all these are ways to reduce the unit cost of widgets.
Putting any (or all) of them with the other three issues on the list
would cause an overlap. The items in the list would no longer be
mutually exclusive. Overlap represents muddled thinking by the
writer and leads to confusion for the reader.
Once you have a list in which all the items are separate and
distinct (i.e., mutually exclusive), you have to check that it also
includes every issue or item relevant to the problem (i.e., it is collectively
exhaustive). Go back for a moment to “Reengineering
our widget production process.” You put this under “Reducing
the unit cost.” Now one of your team members says, “We should
think about ways to improve widget quality through the production
process.”
She’s right. Does this mean you should go back to having
reengineering as an issue in its own right? No, but you should
refine your list to include, under “Reducing unit cost,” the subissue
“Reengineering the production process to reduce unit cost,”
and, under “Improving the way we market . . . ,” the subissue
“Reengineering the production process to improve widget quality.”
Now you have something that looks like this:
• Changing the way we sell our widgets to retail outlets.
• Improving the way we market our widgets to consumers.
Building the Solution 7
–Reengineering the production process to improve widget
quality.
• Reducing the unit cost of our widgets.
–Reengineering the production process to reduce unit cost.
Suppose your team has come up with some interesting ideas
that don’t fit under the main issues. What then? You could ignore
those points, but that wouldn’t help Acme. You could make them
issues in their own right, but then you would have too many issues.
A good McKinsey issue list contains neither fewer than two nor
more than five top-line issues (of course, three is best).
There is a solution to this dilemma—the magical category
“Other Issues.” If you can’t figure out where to put those two or
three brilliant ideas, there is always Other Issues. There is a caveat,
however. Avoid using Other Issues in your top-line list—it looks out
of place. It’s fine lumped in among a bunch of subissues, but on the
first slide of a big presentation, it sticks out. So try a little harder to
fit those brilliant ideas into your top-line issues. Chances are you
can. Still, if all else fails, Other Issues will help you stay MECE.
SOLVE THE PROBLEM AT THE FIRST
MEETING—THE INITIAL HYPOTHESIS
Solving a complex problem is like embarking on a long journey.
The initial hypothesis is your problem-solving map.
The initial hypothesis (IH), the third pillar of the McKinsey problem-
solving process, is the most difficult to explain. To make the
explanation easier for you (and me), I will break this section into
three parts:
8 Thinking About Business Problems
• Defining the initial hypothesis.
• Generating the initial hypothesis.
• Testing the initial hypothesis.
DEFINING THE INITIAL HYPOTHESIS
The essence of the initial hypothesis is “Figure out the solution to
the problem before you start.” This seems counterintuitive, yet you
do it all the time.
Suppose you have to drive to a restaurant in a part of town you
don’t know. You know you have to make the third left off Smith
Street and then take the first right; it’s just after that corner. You
know how to get to Smith Street; you’ll just follow your directions
from there. Congratulations, you have an initial hypothesis.
Solving business problems is more complicated than finding a
restaurant, but the initial hypothesis works the same way. It is a road
map, albeit hastily sketched, to take you from problem to solution. If
your IH is correct, then solving the problem means filling in the details
of the map through factual analysis.
Let’s return to Acme Widgets from the last section. You and your
team must find a way to increase sales at the widget business unit.
After you’ve brainstormed using your knowledge of the widget business,
but before you’ve spent a lot of time gathering and analyzing
the facts, you might come up with the following top-line IH:
We can increase widget sales by:
• Changing the way we sell our widgets to retail outlets.
• Improving the way we market our widgets to consumers.
• Reducing the unit cost of our widgets.
As I will show in the next section, you would then take each issue
down to another level or two of detail to determine which analyses
you need in order to prove or disprove each hypothesis.
Remember that a hypothesis is merely a theory to be proved
Building the Solution 9
or disproved. It is not the answer. If your IH is correct, then, a few
months down the road, it will be the first slide in your presentation.
If it turns out to be wrong, then, by proving it wrong, you will
have enough information to move toward the right answer. By
putting your IH down on paper, and determining how you can
prove or disprove it, you have set up a road map that you can follow
to an eventual proved solution.
GENERATING THE INITIAL HYPOTHESIS
The IH emerges from the combination of facts and structure. Therefore,
as the first step in generating an IH, you must start with the
facts. Remember, however, that you don’t want to do a lot of digging
around for information before you know where to dig. One
former McKinsey SEM had a good approach for generating IHs:
At the start of an engagement, I would just try to digest as
much of our fact base as possible. I would sit down with the
trade publications in that industry for an hour or two—not
so much to gather facts as to absorb something of the flavor
of that industry: what the jargon is, what the current
industry issues are. I would especially seek out people in the
Firm who knew about this particular industry. That was the
quickest, most efficient way to get up to speed.
When generating an initial hypothesis, you don’t need all the
facts, just enough to have a good overview of the industry and the
problem. If the problem is in your own business, you may already
have the facts in your head. That’s great, but facts are not enough.
You have to apply structure to them.
To structure your IH begin by breaking the problem into its
components—the key drivers (see “Find the Key Drivers,” in
Chapter 3). Next, make an actionable recommendation regarding
each driver. This is extremely important. Suppose your business’s
10 Thinking About Business Problems
profits are greatly affected by the weather; in fact, it is the key
determinant of profits in a given quarter. “We have to pray for
good weather” is not an actionable recommendation. On the other
hand, “We must reduce our vulnerability to changes in the
weather” is an actionable, top-line recommendation.
For your next step, you must take each top-line recommendation
and break it down to the level of issues. If a given recommendation
is correct, what issues does it raise? Consider the likely
answers to each issue. Then go down another level. For each issue,
what analyses would you need to make to prove or disprove your
hypothesis? With a little experience, and a lot of debate within
your team, you should get a good sense of what is provable and
what is not. This will help you avoid blind alleys.
In the Acme Widgets problem, suppose your team decided that
the key drivers were the sales force, the consumer marketing strategy,
and production costs. You then came up with a list of actionable,
top-line recommendations as your initial hypothesis:
We can increase widget sales by:
• Changing the way we sell our widgets to retail outlets.
• Improving the way we market our widgets to consumers.
• Reducing the unit cost of our widgets.
Let’s begin with a closer look at the sales force. It’s organized geographically
(Northeast, Mid-Atlantic, Southeast, etc.) and sells primarily
to three types of retail outlets: superstores, department
stores, and specialty stores. The team believes that the sales force
ought to be organized by customer type—that’s one issue.
What analyses could prove or disprove that belief? You could
break out the sales by customer type for each region. If penetration
of superstores in the Northeast is higher than in any other
region and higher than for the other types of retail outlets, find
out why. When you talk to the Northeast sales reps, you might
Building the Solution 11
find that they have a better feel for superstores than any other
sales team. What if they were put in charge of all superstores
across the country and achieved the same penetration? What
would that mean for widget sales?
The end product of this exercise is what McKinsey calls the issue
tree. In other words, you start with your initial hypothesis and
branch out at each issue. The result looks like the figure below.
When you’ve completed your issue tree, you have your problem-
solving map. That’s the easy part. The difficult part will come
when you have to dig deep to prove your hypothesis.
12 Thinking About Business Problems
Change
Sales
Strategy
Sales Force
Organization
Sales Force
Skill Base
Promotion
Strategy
Product Quality
Packaging
Consumer
Advertising
Strategy
Raw Materials
Sourcing
Production Process
Distribution System
Improve
Marketing
Strategy
Reduce
Unit Cost
Increase
Widget
Sales
ISSUE TREE FOR ACME WIDGETS
TESTING THE INITIAL HYPOTHESIS
Before you take your problem-solving map out on the road, you
want (forgive the mixed metaphor) to kick the tires on it. Test
it. Is it the best possible hypothesis you could devise, given what
you know about the industry and your client or company? Have
you thought about all the issues? Have you considered all the
drivers of the problem? Are all your recommendations actionable
and provable?
When I discussed generating an IH, I used the phrase “your
team” rather than “you.” My experience at the Firm (and that
of the many McKinsey alumni I interviewed for this book) taught
me that IHs produced by teams are much stronger than those
produced by individuals. Why? Most of us are poor critics of our
own thinking. We need others to pick apart our ideas. A team of
three or four bright individuals is an excellent vehicle for that.
So when your team meets to come up with an IH let a thousand
flowers bloom. Everyone should have his or her own ideas
and initial hypotheses. Everyone should be prepared to push a
teammate’s thinking and test each new idea. If you are the team
leader, you should try to be the thought leader too. Try to take a
different approach from whatever has just been said. Ask, “What
if we change this? What if we push that? How about looking at it
this way?” The process involves shooting a certain amount of
bull. That’s OK, have fun—as long as it pushes your thinking.
(For more ideas and techniques to push your team’s thinking, see
Chapter 9.)
Building the Solution 13
This page intentionally left blank.
2
DEVELOPING AN APPROACH
Just knowing the essence of the McKinsey problem-solving
process does not mean you can now go forth and conquer
the business world by being fact-based, structured, and
hypothesis-driven. No two business problems are identical;
you must figure out how to approach each problem in order
to devise the best solution for it.
In this chapter, I will explain how McKinsey-ites
approach business problems and apply the McKinsey problem-
solving process to maximum effect.
15
Copyright 1999 Ethan M. Rasiel. Click here for Terms of Use.
THE PROBLEM IS NOT ALWAYS THE PROBLEM
Sometimes a business problem will land on your desk and
you will be told to solve it. Fair enough. But before you go
rushing off in any particular direction, make sure you’re solving
the right problem—it may not be the one you were given.
A McKinsey alumnus with a scientific background told me that
business problem solving is organic and complex, like medicine.
A patient will come into a doctor’s office and say that he thinks
he has the flu. He will tell the doctor about his symptoms: scratchy
throat, achy head, and runny nose. The doctor will not immediately
trust the patient’s conclusion. She will take the patient’s history,
ask some probing questions, and then make her diagnosis.
The patient may have the flu, or a cold, or something more serious,
but the doctor will not rely on the patient to diagnose himself.
At McKinsey, we found that clients were often no better at
diagnosing themselves than a doctor’s patients. Sometimes, problems
would come to us in extremely vague formulations. In my
first study at the Firm, our team’s mission was to help a New York
investment bank “increase profitability”—the business equivalent
of a patient telling the doctor “I don’t feel well.” In another case,
a McKinsey team went in to evaluate expansion opportunities for
a division of a manufacturing company. After a few weeks of gathering
and analyzing data, the team realized that what the division
needed was not expansion; it was closure or sell-off.
The only way to figure out if the problem you have been given
is the real problem is to dig deeper. Get facts. Ask questions. Poke
around. It usually does not take very long to figure out if you are
heading down the right path, and the time you take up front will
16 Thinking About Business Problems
more than make up for itself in time you don’t waste further down
the line.
What do you do when you are convinced you are working on
the wrong problem? When a doctor thinks that a patient’s minor
symptoms mask something more serious, she will tell her patient,
“Mr. Jones, I can treat your headache, but I think it’s a symptom of
something more serious and I’d like to do further tests.” In the
same way, you should go back to your client, or your boss—whoever
it was that asked for your input in the first place—and say,
“You asked me to look at problem X, but the real impact on our
performance will come from solving problem Y. Now I can solve
problem X, if that’s what you really want, but I think it’s in our
interest to focus on Y.” If you have the data to back you up, the
client can either accept your recommendation or tell you to stay on
the original problem, but you will have fulfilled your responsibility
to act in the client’s best interests.
DON’T REINVENT THE WHEEL (PART 1)
Most business problems resemble each other more than they
differ. This means that with a small number of problem-solving
techniques, you can answer a broad range of questions.
These techniques may be somewhere in your organization,
either written down or in the heads of your fellow employees.
If not, use your experience to develop your own tool kit.
McKinsey, like every other consulting firm, has developed a number
of problem-solving methods and given them fancy names:
Analysis of Value Added, Business Process Redesign, Product-Mar-
Developing an Approach 17
ket Scan, and so on. These techniques are immensely powerful.
They allow McKinsey consultants very rapidly to fit the raw data
that lands on their desks into a coherent framework and give them
insights into the nature of the client’s problem. The consultants can
then focus their thinking on the “drivers” of the problem and start
working toward a solution.
We made frequent use of an analytical framework called Forces
at Work. It proved especially valuable at the start of an engagement
in helping us look at the likely external pressures on the client. The
technique involves identifying the client’s suppliers, customers,
competitors, and possible substitute products. We then list all the
changes occurring in each of the four categories. What impact—
positive or negative—could these have on our client? Also, what
internal changes are affecting the client and the client’s industry?
Which of these factors could actually cause major changes to the
way the client designs, manufactures, distributes, sells, and services
its products?
Whatever business you’re in, this framework will not only help
you build a snapshot of your competitive environment, but also
help you develop a view of how that environment might change.
Try it. It sounds simple, but it is a powerful way to stimulate your
thinking about strategic business problems.
These frameworks really help at the start of the problem-solving
process. For instance, when I was a second-year associate, I
joined a team that was helping a major Wall Street investment
bank reorganize its information technology department. All the
executives at the bank wanted IT reorganized, but not if it meant
any changes in the way their computers were supported. The IT
department was a real mess, with 600 employees, a dozen different
subdepartments, and a web of reporting relationships that made
my head spin.
I (and the rest of the team) hardly knew where to begin. For-
18 Thinking About Business Problems
tunately, the Firm had recently developed a new paradigm, called
Business Process Redesign, that gave us a starting point. The Firm
was still coming to grips with BPR, and during the study we broke
new ground for the Firm. It was hard work, but BPR (along with
a lot of sweat, Chinese food, and late nights) helped us help the
client force through the reorganization. If we had not had at least
a starting framework to help us focus our efforts, we might never
have left the ground.
. . . BUT EVERY CLIENT IS UNIQUE
(NO COOKIE-CUTTER SOLUTIONS)
That there are many similarities between business problems
does not mean that similar problems have similar solutions.
You have to validate your initial hypothesis (or your gut)
with fact-based analysis. This will put you in a much better
position to get your ideas accepted.
If all you have is a hammer, then every problem looks like a nail.
Critics of McKinsey (and management consulting in general) say
that the Firm bases its solutions on the most current management
fad—the favorite tool in its intellectual toolbox.
At the Firm, at least, this is untrue. Fact-based analysis as practiced
by McKinsey requires hard proof before any recommendations
are made to clients. Jason Klein, a former SEM at McKinsey
and now publisher of Field & Stream and Outdoor Life, puts it
like this:
People think that the Firm—and management consultants in
general—have a precanned answer. That is certainly not the
Developing an Approach 19
case at McKinsey; if it were, then the Firm would not be as
successful as it is.
The tools may be the same from problem to problem,
but you have to apply them. For instance, in my experience,
in 8 out of 10 pricing problems the answer turns out to be
“raise your prices.” If you do the fact-based analysis—
demand curves, breakeven calculations, budgets—enough
times, you see almost invariably that firms should be raising
their prices. But if you automatically say that’s the
answer, you’ll get into trouble, because you’ll run into an
instance where the answer is really “lower your prices.”
As a corollary to avoiding cookie-cutter solutions, be careful
about blindly trusting your gut. As you gain experience in business,
as you see and solve more and more problems, you will get a fair
idea of what works in your industry and what doesn’t. Although
your gut will often be right, take a hint from former President Reagan:
“Trust and verify.” As a McKinsey alumnus who now works
as a merchant banker put it:
A sharp manager with a lot of business experience can often
reach the same conclusions as McKinsey—and in a much
shorter time—by gut instinct, but most executives aren’t that
good. Because McKinsey focuses so intently on a problem,
it often produces a more robust solution than even the best
executive can. Most executives will miss a few things
because they don’t take the time—they usually don’t have
the time.
So, even though your initial instinct may be—and probably is
—right, take enough time to verify your gut with facts.
20 Thinking About Business Problems
DON’T MAKE THE FACTS FIT
YOUR SOLUTION
Avoid the temptation to view your initial hypothesis as the
answer and the problem-solving process as an exercise
in proving the IH. Keep an open and flexible mind. Don’t
let a strong initial hypothesis become an excuse for mental
inflexibility.
On an engagement for a major insurance company, the EM
assured his team and the client that the key to restoring the client’s
profitability was eliminating “leakage”—the acceptance of customer
claims without adjustment. He assigned a new associate to
determine the rate of leakage in fire insurance claims over the previous
three years. As any good McKinsey associate would, this
young man applied himself tirelessly and diligently to his task. He
combed through stacks of claims in search of leakage. The result:
very little leakage, far less than the EM had predicted.
Rather than take these data for what they were—an indication
that he needed to reexamine his hypothesis—the EM simply told
the young associate to look again, this time in auto insurance . . .
and then in marine insurance . . . and in business insurance.
Nowhere were the expected rates of leakage to be found.
One day, the EM was sitting in the team’s on-site HQ looking
slightly despondent. The team’s main contact at the client poked
his head around the doorpost. “What’s the matter, Nick?” he said.
“Not enough leakage for you?”
The moral of this little tale is that, no matter how brilliant,
insightful, and original you may feel your initial hypothesis to be,
you must always be prepared to accept that the facts may prove
Developing an Approach 21
you wrong. If they do, adjust to the facts. Don’t try to pound them
into your framework like square pegs into round holes.
How do you avoid that trap? The McKinsey way is to take an
occasional step back from the continual grind of fact gathering and
analysis and to ask yourself what you have learned over the past
week (or two weeks, or whatever). How does the new information
fit into your initial hypothesis? If it doesn’t, how might it
change that hypothesis? Doing these little reality checks now and
then could save you from chasing down blind alleys.
As a final note, I should add that the story, although true, represents
the exception rather than the rule at McKinsey, at least in
my experience. And that EM has long since left the Firm.
MAKE SURE YOUR SOLUTION FITS
YOUR CLIENT
The most brilliant solution, backed up by libraries of data
and promising billions in extra profits, is useless if your client
or business can’t implement it. Know your client. Know the
organization’s strengths, weaknesses, and capabilities—what
management can and cannot do. Tailor your solutions with
these factors in mind.
A former McKinsey EM who now works on Wall Street tells
this story:
We were doing a cost cutting study for a large financial institution.
We discovered that they were in the midst of linking
all their offices—they had several hundred around the
world—by satellite. This project had begun several years
22 Thinking About Business Problems
previously, and they had managed so far to roll it out to
about half their offices.
We determined that with currently available technology
they could do the same thing for a fraction of the cost using
conventional phone lines. By our calculations, they would
have saved $170 million on a present value basis.
We took our findings to the senior manager overseeing
the engagement, the man who had brought us in to begin
with, and he said, “Well, that’s terrific. We appreciate that
it could have saved us a few hundred million dollars, but
we’ve already started down this road and, politically, it’s just
too risky. You have to realize that we only have a certain
amount of energy in the organization and, frankly, we need
ideas that are bigger than this.”
At one level, it’s unbelievable that he didn’t accept our
idea. But on another level, we were coming up with other
suggestions that would save the organization half a billion or
a billion dollars. So this was, if not exactly chicken feed, just
a medium-size payoff for them. It’s a rational response. If I
can do only three things, I’ll do the three biggest.
McKinsey hires people with stellar academic records and
enforces a rigorous discipline in analyzing problems and structuring
solutions. Because of this, a McKinsey-ite’s (especially a
new hire’s) first instinct is to go hell for leather after the very
best solution.
Unfortunately, when academic ideals meet business realities,
business realities usually win. Businesses are full of real people,
with real strengths and weaknesses and limitations. These people
can do only so much with the finite resources available in their
organizations. Some things they just cannot do, whether for political
reasons, lack of resources or inability.
Developing an Approach 23
As a consultant, you bear the responsibility for knowing the
limitations of your client; if your client is your own employer—or
your own business—that responsibility is doubled. Knowing those
limitations, you must make sure that any recommendations you
make fit within them.
SOMETIMES YOU HAVE TO LET THE
SOLUTION COME TO YOU
The McKinsey rules of problem solving, like all rules, have
their exceptions. You will not be able to form an initial
hypothesis every time. Sometimes, the client will not know
what the problem is, just that there is a problem. Other
times, the scope of your project will be so large—or so
vague—that starting with an IH will be worthless. Still other
times, you will be breaking new ground and nothing in your
experience will point to a solution. Don’t panic! If you get
your facts together and do your analyses, the solution will
come to you.
Hamish McDermott, former EM at the Firm, recounted this story:
I was on a study where we were trying to improve the performance
of the foreign exchange business of a major bank;
we were supposed to reduce costs in the back-office operation
by 30 percent. I had nothing at that stage that I could
point to, no initial hypothesis about how to get those costs
out of the organization. Frankly, we knew very little about
how the back-office processing worked.
24 Thinking About Business Problems
I had to interview the woman in charge of back-office
processing along with her senior staff. She didn’t mean to be
unpleasant, although it certainly felt that way, but she came
right out and said, “You’ve never done this before and you
know nothing about this business. One of two things is
going to happen. Either you’ll come back with something
we don’t agree with, which will necessarily be wrong, or
you’ll listen to us and come back with what we already
know, in which case you’ve added no value. We understand
that you’re here and that you’re working on this, but from
our point of view it’s a total waste of our time and the
bank’s money.”
Still, she gave us the data we asked for. It turned out that
one product, which represented about 5 percent of their
business, was producing about 50 percent of their costs. We
were able to fix that. They’d had no idea this was going on.
In subsequent stages of the engagement, we were able to
extend this analysis to other parts of the business and we easily
exceeded our targets.
The moral of this story is that an initial hypothesis is not a prerequisite
for successful problem solving. Having one will help organize
and forward your thinking, but if you can’t come up with one,
don’t despair. Any McKinsey-ite will tell you that no business
problem is immune to the power of fact-based analysis. Put
together enough facts, combine them with some creative thinking,
and you will come up with a solution.
Developing an Approach 25
SOME PROBLEMS YOU JUST CAN’T SOLVE . . .
SOLVE THEM ANYWAY
Eventually, you will run into a brick wall that is tougher than
your head. Don’t keep pounding; it has no effect on the wall
and does your head no good.
My unofficial mentor at McKinsey asked me to work with him on
what promised to be a fun and exciting study. The client, a major
financial institution in the midst of reorganizing its investment
management business, faced severe challenges of heroic dimensions:
thousands of employees, billions of dollars. The McKinsey
team included my mentor and my favorite EM. It seemed the perfect
recipe for an enjoyable, challenging McKinsey engagement.
The recipe might have been right, but the result left a bad taste
in our mouths. Factions within the client’s senior management prevented
us from doing our job. Data we asked for arrived late, or
in an unusable form or not at all. People we needed to interview
refused to speak with us. The members of the client team vigorously
pursued their own agendas at the expense of reaching a solution.
We spent several uncomfortable months on this study and,
in the end, had to make what recommendations we could, “declare
victory,” and get out.
My team’s experience was hardly unique in the history of the
Firm. The road of problem solving is often strewn with obstacles.
Data to prove your hypothesis may be missing or bad. Sometimes
businesses realize too late that they have a problem; by the time
McKinsey, or anyone, addresses the problem, the business is
already doomed.
The biggest obstacle—the troll guarding the bridge—is politics.
26 Thinking About Business Problems
The first thing to understand about politics—and how it can help
or hinder you from doing your job—is that businesses are full of
real people. When you look at the boxes on an organization chart,
you are really looking at people. When you move those boxes
around, you change someone’s life. As one former McKinsey EM
remarked, “Sometimes change management means just that—
changing management.”
When members of a McKinsey team go into a client, they
carry change with them. Some at the client will welcome the
bringers of change as white knights riding to the rescue; others
will see McKinsey as an invading army to either flee or drive out,
depending on their power in the organization. As one former
McKinsey-ite put it, “It was a rare engagement when there
wasn’t at least one sector of the client organization that did not
want us there and did not want us to come up with a real answer.”
In most cases, when senior management brings in McKinsey,
enough players in the organization will cooperate willingly and
McKinsey can be effective. A few malcontents may grumble or
even cause trouble, but in the end they will be either converted to
McKinsey’s cause or bypassed. Sometimes, however, one powerful
faction in an organization calls in McKinsey against the wishes
of another powerful faction. That’s when trouble arises, as we
found out.
You have several options to pick from when confronted by a
problem that seems too difficult to solve.
Redefine the problem. You can tell your client that the problem
is not X, it’s Y. This is especially useful when you know that
solving Y will add a lot of value, where as trying to wrestle with
X would cost a lot of time and resources for little result. If you
make this switch very early on, you show great business judgment;
if you do it after several weeks” work, you risk being accused of
a cop out.